license inclusion guidelines updates (#990)
spdx/license-list-XML: DOCS/license-inclusion-principles.md

* The submitted license must not match another license already on the SPDX License List as per the SPDX matching guidelines.
* All OSI-approved licenses will be included on the SPDX License List.
  * This is consistent with early collaboration between SPDX and OSI (2011) to ensure that all OSI-approved licenses were represented on the SPDX License List. Also at that time, OSI began using the SPDX license identifiers in their URLs and on the license pages.

> * Software licenses that apply only to executables and do not provide for the availability of the source code will not be included on the SPDX License List.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Software licenses that only license executables, and don't apply to source code, will not be included on the SPDX License List.
```

Author: so, executables instead of binaries is the key change here... I don't have a strong opinion on that one. 
@zvr @goneall @kestewart - thoughts?

Reviewer 2: I don't have a strong opinion, but lean in favor of changing to "executables" as @kemitchell suggested. I think that's closer to capturing the intent of what we're trying to say, since not all programming languages' "executables" would be "binary-only" in a literal sense.

Author: change to executables seems to have favor. but I still think we need to keep "do not provide for availability of source code" as that's more specific than "don't apply to source code"

Reviewer: Folks would say permissive licenses "don't provide for availability of source code".

Author: that was brought up before and I think this was the language that came out of that conversation - as in the source code is available (not requires availability downstream)

@swinslow just merged! you should have joined call, which just ended!! :)

Author: "only applies to executables" is also clarifying - no one would say that about MIT

Reviewer: I can't do long standing calls during business hours. I need that time for client work and client calls.

> * The license has identifiable and stable text; it is not in the midst of drafting. The license steward is committed to not modifying after addition to the list and to versioning new versions in the future.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The license has identifiable and stable text; it is not in the midst of drafting.
* The license steward, if any, is committed to not modifying after addition to the list and to versioning new versions in the future.
```

Historical licenses may not have active stewards, either because they're no longer maintaining the license, or because they're defunct, &c.

Author: that seems like a good addition, thanks!

  
**Other factors (roughly in order of importance):**

> 1. The license substantially complies with one of the following open source definitions (even if not submitted for approval or these organization have not considered the license):

Reviewer: It's good to have a list of these definitions, but I'm still against license submission by proxy. The "substantial" compliance perhaps conveys that SPDX discussion is no substitute for submission to other orgs. But it's not particularly clear how we'll go about discussing "substantially", either.

Kind of reminds me of federal courts deciding whether there's been a "material" effect under state contract law. Awkward.

To make this more concrete: Does this mean no more noncommercial licenses, from Creative Commons or anyone else?

Author: @kemitchell - you are a lawyer, you are used to awkward, gray area delineators!! :)
we do *not* want to be in the position of saying what does or does not meet someone else's definition (nor have we ever wanted to be in that position). That would be inappropriate.  So, we need that flexibility.  

Also, given all we've observed over the past year and a half, flexibility will allow the guidelines to flex as needed going forward (we don't want to have to update these too often, I'd hope!)

As for NC licenses - see historical background ;)  (which is why I wanted to include the historical background, so we don't have to keep answering that question and can say - here, read this!) I don't know - if it meets all the other criteria, I suppose it could be possible?  

case-by-case scenario... totality of the circumstances...

Reviewer 2: +1 to @jlovejoy's comment here. 

Flexibility is relevant, and I think it should be understood in light of both (a) the remaining factors on this list; and (b) the intent of making the current guidelines changes, which is largely to make it permissible for more source-available licenses to be added to the list.

  * [Open Source Definition (OSD)](https://opensource.org/osd) from the Open Source Initiative (OSI)
  * [Free Software Definition](https://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-sw.en.html) from the Free Software Foundation (FSF)
  * [Open Source Hardware Definition](https://www.oshwa.org/definition/) from the Open Source Hardware Association (OSHWA)
  * [Open Definition](http://opendefinition.org/od/2.1/en/) from the Open Knowledge Foundation
  * [Free Cultural Works definition](https://freedomdefined.org/Definition) from Freedom Defined.org

> 2. The license is structured to be generally usable by anyone. It is not a "vanity" license or specific to one project, consortium or corporation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. The license is not specific to one project, consortium or corporation.
```

"Vanity" is pejorative, but not particularly clear. I associate it mostly with antiproliferation, in the sense of not welcoming new licenses with nearly the same purported legal effect as existing terms. But SPDX is full of licenses with substantially similar purported effects. And I've often found it useful precisely for that broader comprehensiveness. That allowed us to code [Blue Oak's permissive license list](https://blueoakcouncil.org/list) in SPDX IDs, for example.

Author: huh, never really thought of "vanity" as pejorative - just that it's a term used that seems to have general understanding among open source license folks (who've been around awhile) - but it's not a necessary term.

I do think that we should keep the "The license is structured to be generally usable by anyone" part (or the like) - I was trying to phrase things in the positive (then add the negative for color as needed). 

perhaps:
The license is structured to be generally usable by anyone. It is not specific to one project, consortium or corporation.

??

Reviewer 2: Agree with the change in @jlovejoy's comment here -- important to keep "structured to be generally usable by anyone" but fine with the change to remove "vanity license."

> 3. The license has actual, substantial use such that it is likely to be encountered. Substantial use may be demonstrated via use in many projects, or in one or a few highly significant projects. For new licenses, there is definitive plans for the license to be used in one or a few significant projects.

Reviewer 2: My only comment here is, in the last sentence, should it be "one or a few **highly** significant projects" so that it's aligned with the standard in the preceding sentence?

Author: hmmm... or remove "highly" from the previous sentence?  I'm not sure I know the difference b/w "highly significant" or "significant"...

Reviewer 2: That works too and is a fair point. I think as long as they're aligned then I could be fine with either.

> 3. The license has actual, substantial use such that it is likely to be encountered. Substantial use may be demonstrated via use in many projects, or in one or a few highly significant projects. For new licenses, there is definitive plans for the license to be used in one or a few significant projects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. The license has actual, substantial use such that it is likely to be encountered. Substantial use may be demonstrated via use in many projects, or in one or a few highly significant projects. For new licenses, there are definitive plans for the license to be used in one or a few significant projects.
```

Typo fix above, but in general, I'm a bit dismayed by this rule. The words "actual", "substantial", "likely", "many", "significant", and "definitive" imply a bar being raised, but I'm not sure how high.

Author: well, if we think about how we've weighed this factor - it started as simply "use in the wild" but over time, that isn't enough as people write new licenses and want to have an SPDX id from the get-go. So we were trying to provide a flexible guideline, that also still allows rejecting silly licenses that one project uses and are really similar to a well-known existing license and they really ought to just use that instead of making something new. (we've had some examples of this)

> 4. If the license does not substantively comply with one of the above open source definitions, then the license is primarily intended for free distribution of content (including, in the case of software, its source code) with limited restrictions, and meets other factors listed here.

Reviewer: I think folks will definitely stop at number one when they want to oppose a license, and not bother reading this far.

I wonder what motivated the idea of "limited" restrictions.

Author: I think that goes along with "substantially complies"...

> 5. The license steward supports or is at least aware of and does not oppose its submission to the SPDX License List.

Reviewer: Does SPDX still see submission of historical, perhaps historically significant, license terms and variations?

Author: yes

Reviewer 2: Yes, e.g. decades-old license statements from the Linux kernel or elsewhere which predate the standardization of license texts.

Many of these are clearly compliant with the OSD or other such standards, and are typically seen as appropriate to add to the list given their use in one or a few widely-propagated projects, even if not in a large number of different projects.

> The SPDX legal team will also consider any other information considered relevant by the license steward or open source community.

Reviewer 3: "additional" in place of "other" ?

Author: sure, that works

Comments on license inclusion will be noted in the Github issue for the license (or reference to meeting minutes, as necessary). Some license requests may be decided solely via comments in the Github issue and some may involve discussion on the bi-weekly legal call. Thus it is imperative that requestors join the mailing list and calls to fully participate.

*last updated Mar 2020*

> # Historical Background

Reviewer: Per my earlier comment on the PR, I wonder whether this is part of the guidelines, to be read with them, or could be moved to a separate document.

Author: see comment above
